i'm going to show you something from
pinocchio
now this is an initiation ritual
it's a journey to the depths so it's a
journey to the underworld
it's the consequence of a collapse in
previous personality and the
disintegration of that previous
personality into a chaotic state prime
prior to rebirth
now what happens in pinocchio which by
the way was released at about the same
time that world war ii was was brewing
and which also contains one of the best
representations of
of the
of the individual motivations for
fascism that i've ever seen anywhere
that's the scenes that are associated
with pleasure island remember all the
the puppet is trying to become a real
boy right so he's a marionette to begin
with something else is pulling his
strengths well for jung that's your
habitual
state of being
something else is pulling your strings
even the idea that you're autonomous is
the consequence of something else
pulling your strings and for jung
what you needed to do is find out
exactly who and what is pulling your
strings and decide if that's the
direction in which you want to go and
that's really what happens to pinocchio
because we're going to watch pinocchio
part of it in the pinocchio story he
starts out as a marionette now he's a
marionette made by a good father because
geppetto is a good father he's a good
craftsman and so on so he's a marionette
with a benevolent puppeteer but as soon
as he develops some autonomy then he
becomes prey to
forces that are elements of the demonic
archetype in fact the worst bad guy in
the entire movie turns into satan
himself at one point in the movie he
basically has horns and a bright red
face and he manifests himself as so
terrifying that the coyote
coyote
wolf fox
and the cat that are trying to corrupt
pinocchio are terrified because they get
a like they're criminals they're petty
criminals and deceptive and and so forth
but when they get a look at who's
pulling their strings it's enough to
terrify them and
so pinocchio goes through a series of
temptations
of various sorts including a freudian
temptation and the freudian temptation
is to remain weak and sickly instead of
becoming a real person so it's an
eatable problem and another
problem that faces pinocchio is that
he's offered false celebrity as a way of
solving his life's problems so he's
offered the opportunity to become an
actor and what that means is a deceitful
fake who's constructed a persona that
makes him appear far more valuable than
he really is so the movie outlines two
pathological modes of movement towards
maturity one being a phony and the other
taking the easy way out and
and hyper
uh valuing all your pathology so that
you become dependent
so anyways
and then another mode of pathological
development is offered to pinocchio
which is to do nothing but engage in
short-term impulsive and destructive
play and that's on treasure island but
when he pleasure island but when he goes
to pleasure island he finds that it's
actually ruled by demonic forces with
faceless
entities who are transforming all the
pleasure-seeking marionettes
to braying donkeys who are slaves
it's like
so
pinocchio escapes from that and he does
it basically by jumping into the unknown
and that's where we're going to start
our
exposure to his initiation
okay so now you can imagine what's
happened is he was on pleasure island
and everything went to hell
fundamentally and so he jumped into the
water to escape from that and that's
equivalent to plunging into chaos and so
chaos was
an escape from pathological tyranny
and now he's tried to go home so this is
the
psyche
in its search for maturation runs into
an obstacle which is the tyrannical
element of the great father that it
cannot cope with and it trots home runs
home it's a defeat typical part of a
hero story is the initial defeat of the
hero when he
encounters usually either the terrible
great father or the terrible great
mother
so and so this is a retrogressive
jung would call this retrogressive
restoration of the persona
so it's sort of like maybe you're a
well-adapted adolescent and you live at
home and you're a happy adolescent and
everything's good at home and then you
go out to try to be an adult and you
fail and then when you come back home
you try to act like a happy adolescent
again but you're not what you are in
fact is an unhappy adult and if you move
back to the happy adolescent mode of
being then it's it's false and
pathological
you can't go home again another typical
motif in literature
now the cricket
i can't tell you everything about this
story
i can tell you a couple of strange
things about it one is that the cricket
is gemini cricket right and the initials
of jiminy cricket are jc and jiminy
cricket was a common southern american
mild form of
uh cursing it's the equivalent of jesus
christ and so you might think and of
course
the cricket is pinocchio's conscience
and
well so then you might ask yourself why
in the world would a
pejorative mildly pejorative term for
jesus christ be applied to a cricket
who's guiding a puppet into the water to
rescue his father from a whale why would
any of that happen
and the answer to that is you know why
but you can't say why you can't say why
you know or what it is that you know but
the mere fact that it makes sense and it
does is an indication from a union
perspective that you're operating at an
archetypal level you understand this
and so i could say here's an example of
why the cricket is a bug
well things bug you
right we say that things bug me well you
should do something about
the things that bug you
because
that's your conscience calling to you
it's it's destiny in some sense
manifesting itself as an unconscious
impulse that really bugs me means
if you can you should do something about
it because you think about it man
there's a lot of things out there that
might bug you but lots of them don't but
some of them do
well why do those bug you and not the
other things
well
that's a complicated question but one
potential answer to it is that
there's part of your psyche that's
oriented towards further development
jung would call that the self and that's
like the totality of everything that you
could be
and it's it's it's it's a it's a strange
sort of entity in some sense because
it's partly potential and its potential
that expands across time but the way
that your potential totality calls to
you in the present
is by placing things in front of you
that are your problem
and they announce themselves as your
problem and they do that by bothering
you
so then if you pick up the task of
fixing the things that bothers you then
you find the pathway to further
expansion of your personality
so and that's what's happening with
pinocchio now one of the things that's
really interesting about the pinocchio
movie that makes it incredibly
sophisticated is that despite the fact
that the cricket is a avatar of christ
so to speak
the cricket has things to learn just
like pinocchio
and so that's very cool because it's so
cool it's so sophisticated because it
means that you do have a conscience that
guides you
but until you establish a dialogue with
it
both you and the conscience are immature
you have to establish a conscious
dialogue with it and then interact
together in a manner that propels your
development across time and that'll stop
you from being a marionette of forces
that would make you a braying donkey who
does nothing but slave away in salt
mines
so
okay so pinocchio goes home that doesn't
work and that's where we're gonna start
here
okay so what's happened there
well
many many things at multiple levels of
reality simultaneously and that's the
characteristic of an archetypal story
so on one level pinocchio's too old to
go home he can't go home to his father
because in some sense he's already
transcended his father
so there are things for example that
your father can't help you with and the
reason for that is that you don't he
doesn't know any more about the
situation than you do and he can't and
so that's where his knowledge limits out
so that would be sort of on the personal
level and then on the trans-personal
level which would be the deeper deeper
archetypal level what's happening to
pinocchio is exactly what nietzsche
described at the end of the 19th century
because remember that geppetto is his
creator and now he's dead he's gone and
so pinocchio is bereft of of
placement so to speak he's
his soul has been corrupted
and he doesn't know what to do about it
and when he returns to
his family home or when he returns to
his tradition
what he finds is nothing
okay so then what happens well this is
another thing that you'll swallow with
just no problem whatsoever well this
dove comes along that's sort of golden
and glowing and drops a note right in
front of him now
you may remember and perhaps you don't
but
the star from which the dove comes
is a representation of the blue fairy
and the blue fairy is the positive
element of the unknown in uh pinocchio
movie and so what it basically is saying
that
when you're despairing because your
father has died and your tradition has
nothing to offer that the positive
element of the unknown may provide you
with a message about where to go if you
pay enough attention
that would be an intuition
or it would be the automatic attraction
of your interest to a new thing by
forces that you do not understand so one
of the real ways of coming to grips with
the idea of the act of unconscious is to
understand that you cannot control what
you're interested in
and so then you might ask well if it's
not you
what is it
and if you think about that problem long
enough you'll start to understand what
jung was talking about because that
is the way that you can understand in
your own life
that the things that direct you as a
being are not things that you
consciously choose in fact they're not
even things that you can consciously
choose
they're directed by other forces
so anyways
the dove drops a message in front of
pinocchio and
and the cricket
now it's the cricket that reads it so
it's the same idea
as what bugs you so to speak the cricket
is the interpreter
okay so now what have we found out well
we found out that
god the father and god the father the
creator are not in fact dead
which is what nature pronounced
but alive in some weird way in this
horrible creature at the bottom of the
ocean
and so what does pinocchio decide to do
he decides to go find him
that's actually what you're doing at
university by the way
for all the chaos that you experience
when you come to university and all the
uncertainty and all the doubt
what you're trying to do is to resurrect
your dead father from the bottom of the
ocean
and if you do that you won't be a
marionette
and if you don't you will be
now this is very interesting because the
conscience here plays a very
dichotomous role
so on the one hand pinocchio is often
ahead of his conscience so to speak so
he's taking the leading role and
the dialogue is kind of choppy and
neither of them know exactly what
they're doing but in this situation it's
very paradoxical because
you can see pinocchio's being half
turned into brain jackass at this point
something you might well consider when
you remember your adolescence
so
at in this point that the the cricket
his conscience does two things it warns
him how horrible this is going to be and
how utterly dangerous it is and then at
the same time it helps them prepare and
goes along with them and so it's quite
comical so watch what happens here
okay so i've cut this a little bit but
what happens in the movie is that he
goes to the bottom of the ocean and he
starts to ask about monstro and as soon
as he asks any of the fish down there
the denizens of the sub oceanic world
where monster is they just run away and
so monstro is he who cannot be named
right and i'm sure you've encountered
that in your reading before
right that's the that's uh the hallmark
of
in the harry potter series
right see now you've done it
yeah so this represents something so
terrible that it can't even be talked
about okay so what happens is pinocchio
ends up not only at the bottom of the
ocean but he has to go to the deepest
part of the bottom of the ocean where
the most terrible thing rests
and so
we're cutting to the point where he does
that
so now you might ask how did geppetto
get in the whale and the answer that is
it's never really made that clear in the
movie
but i can tell you some things about
that is that
if you conceptualize your historical
tradition
as a personality like a body of laws and
customs say
it's not alive
it's dead right because it's composed of
the past
and because it's dead it can't come up
with anything new
so if it encounters something new it
it's stopped and that's what's happened
to geppetto is that
he's engulfed by this
entity that represents the absolute
unknown and he cannot figure out how to
get out and the reason for that is none
of the things he knows so none of the
things that history has produced as a
body of knowledge are sufficient to deal
with the fundamental problem
that doesn't mean they're useless
it just means that
just like
the puppet is lost without the father
the father is also lost without the
puppet
and that's
the relationship between you and history
your history when you study history you
think well you're studying a record of
events in the past and that's not right
what you're studying is the
the circumstances that gave rise to you
as a as a being and unless you
understand your history
in every way you possibly can then
you're an incomplete creature
you you don't know enough to move
forward
in the same way your culture
being composed of
dead fathers so to speak
can't progress without you because
you're its eyes
and there's an egyptian story
that features the god horus who i've
talked to you about before who actually
resurrects his father from the dead by
giving him an eye
so gepetto can't figure out how to get
out of this whale without help all right
now something very sophisticated happens
here so and i have to explain it to you
at multiple levels at the same time so
now
geppetto
is hungry
and when the whale opens its mouth a lot
of fish come in
now one of the things i want you to
think about you can just put this in the
back of your mind is that one of the
oldest
one of the oldest
symbolic representations of christ is a
fish and all of his followers were
fishermen and so there's this weird
relationship between the messianic
figure who's at the base of it at least
at the base of christian culture and the
idea of things that are pulled up from
the depths now here's what happens in
this part of the movie it's so amazing
so gepetto is looking for fish
and the reason for that is he doesn't
think he can get out of the whale and so
he might as well have some fish while
he's while he's in there
and so he's given up on getting out now
what happens is that the whale swallows
pinocchio as if he's a fish
so pinocchio is put into the same
category as fish and it happens it
happens to gepetto a couple of times he
mistakes pinocchio for a fish you'll see
so
what that means in some sense is that
geppetto can't distinguish between
the fish that will feed you for the day
and whatever it is that pinocchio
represents and so you could think about
pinocchio as a fisherman instead of as a
fish and so you can think about it this
way and here here's a here's a an old
saying
if you give a man a fish you feed him
for one day but if you teach him to fish
you feed him forever and so the idea is
it's better to develop the skill to
acquire something than it is to have the
thing now what pinocchio represents is
he's like a meta fish i know this is a
strange way of thinking about it
geppetto's problem isn't that he's
hungry
his problem is that he can't get out of
the whale and so what he's fishing for
isn't something to eat it's
something that will help him get out of
the whale but he can't recognize the
difference between the proximate
solution
which is so that he'll just no longer be
hungry so he's got a very short-term
outlook and a solution to the much
broader problem so what happens is the
whale swallows a bunch of fish and
pinocchio's in there and geppetto is
fishing away and he catches pinocchio
and pinocchio announces himself and
geppetto
says
tells him to be quiet because he's
interfering with him fishing and then
when he turns to hug pinocchio because
he wakes up he actually hugs a fish and
then he discards the fish
so then he figures out that pinocchio's
there then geppetto decides that well
they're going to have to live inside the
whale and it's another idea of his
blindness at this point because he's
he's composed of the dead past so to
speak so what pinocchio does is start to
destroy the ship itself which is what
they're floating in the whale to start a
fire and the fire makes the whale mad
enough to spit them out and the whale
then transforms itself into a dragon and
tries to kill them because it's a fire
breathing entity at that point and so
part of the understory is
it's better to figure out how to fish
than to fish
or that more profoundly it's better to
figure out how to do something than to
merely benefit from the thing itself
pinocchio represents that which can do
new things so he's a hero and he's
willing to destroy part of the current
order that's the ship in order to
produce a new
strategy that will actually free them
from the whale now he wants to get his
father out of there too so that's what
happens in the next five minutes i would
say
okay so now there's a shock here because
essentially in some sense
the entity that's going to provide the
solution to this very complex problem
has arrived on the scene but it's quite
damaged
first of all it's been speaking
improperly
right so that's an adolescent
representation so it braze a lot of
nonsense
and it's been corrupted in a variety of
ways and so you know to to some degree
what that means is that as you mature
and you're moving away from your mere
marionette status your interaction with
society like rousseau said corrupts you
in all sorts of ways i mean you're
participating in that corruption but it
still happens but in the representation
in the movie the truth of the matter is
it doesn't matter if you've been
corrupted to some degree as long as you
haven't absolutely sacrificed to your
capacity for true speech and vision so
you know that's a pretty hopeful
message because pinocchio is by no means
a perfect entity but he might be good
enough see that's also an indication
there of why people are often unwilling
to
form a representation with uh
so to speak form a relationship with the
archetype of the great father because to
some degree the archetype is a figure of
perfection and the individual in
relationship to that archetype is always
pathologically flawed and so the
embarrassment of that realization which
is exactly what's happening to pinocchio
right now is often enough to stop people
from doing it so what what that would
say to say what that means in some sense
is that in order for you to mature
in in the fullest possible manner you
have to
understand the the manner in which
you're deeply flawed in relationship to
the to your
your potential as it might be
historically determined and that's a
very bitter thing to do you know it's
much easier and people do this all the
time to engage in half-witted formulaic
ideological criticisms of the system as
a whole it's like
you know the probability that the system
is more flawed than you is pretty damn
low so you might want to start with you
know getting rid of your donkey ears and
your tail and stop bringing nonsense
before you judge the entire
you know
historical
process by which human beings have come
into being
so anyways that's kind of what that
means
okay so this is very interesting too
because so pinocchio ends up being a
master of fire well you can think about
that as
there is a book written a while back by
a primatologist
who also wrote demonic males richard
rangham and he talked about the origin
of fire and as far as rangham is
concerned we invented fire about two
million years ago and that enabled us to
cook food and that enabled us to swap
intestinal length for brain
so if you look at a chimpanzee you know
chimpanzees are like the ultimate in
couch potatoes right there they're
they're about this high and they're
shaped like this they have this huge
barrel body and the reason they have
that is because they eat leaves
and so they have to spend like eight
hours a day eating leaves they will eat
meat if they can get it they have to
spend like eight hours a day eating
leaves and just chewing them over and
over because like leaves a they don't
want to be eaten so they're pretty tough
and inedible and b they don't have any
nutritive quality to speak of so the
chimpanzee has to spend all of its time
chewing which is rather mindless
endeavor all things considered
whereas human beings two million years
ago or thereabouts invented fire and as
a consequence of that we could cook meat
and meat is incredibly energy uh rich
and so and it's easy to digest once it's
cooked and so the consequence of the
invention of fire was that
we're the way we are today we could have
a brain
instead of a gut
and so the idea that pinocchio's
mastery of fire
and it's as something more than merely a
means of cooking that's how it started
out right but you can think of our
entire
technological capacity as stemming from
the mastery of fire now the other thing
you can think of and this is very much
worth considering is that
pinocchio masters fire and that turns
the whale into a dragon and so the idea
there too is that and this is an old
idea is that
our technological prowess
is something that makes
nature itself angry
and of course you might say well do you
believe this and the answer to that is
well how many of you have
environmentalist leanings and
that's exactly the story that you're
following because you're still wondering
about whether or not mastery of fire was
in somehow against the natural order and
then it will end up in all of our deaths
and you know that's a reasonable thing
to worry about but
not mastering it was going to end up
pretty badly too so
what happens is that in the midst of
this complete chaos pinocchio has a
choice and the choices he can either
save himself which is a very very
selfish choice and reduces him to an a
historical individual because he has no
relationship left with his father or he
can put his himself at great risk and
rescue his father you know finish the
process stop his father from drowning
and and complete
okay so
[Music]
pinocchio dies
and then his father brings him home
and so because he's rescued his father
the benevolent spirit of nature appears
resurrects him
and turns him into a real human being
so it's pretty funny as far as i'm
concerned that the answer to nietzsche's
greek question manifested itself in 19
mid-1930s in the forms of an at form of
an animated child's movie
so you know and that's and that's an
example that's an example of a number of
things it's an example of how archetypes
work it's also an example of how artists
are on the edge of discovery all the
time and they discover things they don't
even understand
so
we'll see you next tuesday
[Applause]